---
layout: post
title: Amazon
tags: [long, Amazon]
comments: True
---

I wake up, and the first thing I have to do is figure out what I’m going to wear for the day. Not very different from school, but it’s a bit different in that I don’t have a lot of time. My bus arrives at eight-thirty, and I set my alarm for eight. Add morning grogginess or just plain unwillingness to get up to go to work, time to brush my teeth, style my hair a bit, and then the time to walk to the bus stop, and I have about five to ten minutes each morning to make some decisions.

Do I wear shorts or jeans? Do I need a jacket or just a long sleeve? What goes well with these colors? Shoes? What if it rains? Do I want to draw attention or just do something low-key?

By the time I’m out the door, I’m usually already a few minutes late, but I can’t run out because there are a few spiders that spin their webs across the backyard, and one that hangs outside my door. Instead, I have to find a stick and then, swinging my arms around like a crazy person, break their webs and watch the spiders fall to one side of the path, one after another, until the way is clear. Finally, I can move out of my shack onto the sidewalk and then speed walk to catch the bus, which I almost never do. I usually see the 64X drive-on by just as I turn the corner, and I take the slower 76 that comes at eight-forty instead.

Inside, there’re worn-down shades of navy blue, stainless-steel silver, and lots and lots of grey. The people are quiet; earbuds are in, gazes are focused outside, on their phones, or on the back of their eyelids. The only things you hear are the rush of outside traffic or the pre-recorded, digitally-compressed voice that announces the next stop. It sounds like a woman’s voice, but it’s completely toneless; there’s no warmth, no joy, no sense of life, and I wonder — is she really that soulless, robotic, or is that just her job?

Or a result of her job?

But the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping, the starting and stopping lurching of morning city traffic interrupts my brooding and makes me feel something more. As I sit there, swinging back and forth in my seat, victim to the inertia, I feel angry, bitterly, bitterly angry. I feel like crying. 

Coming into this summer, I didn’t think I’d like working at Amazon, but I was hopeful. I thought I could at least get along with my team, make some new friends, work on some goals, explore the city, that it’d be nice to have my own place, to live on my own. 

Getting off the bus, I walk the five blocks or so to my office and see the homeless, some shirtless, some begging for cigarettes, some just mute, laying curled up in a doorway. The beggars are always there, holding the same signs at the same times. The ones that don’t talk to you, that don’t ask you for anything, they change. As I get closer to Doppler though, a thirty-six story skyscraper named after one of Amazon’s first products, or something, the homeless disappear and are instead replaced by Indian men, East Asian men, and white men with blue badges. On rare occasions, someone black or hispanic, a woman, but, usually, they’re towing trash bins with their latex gloves, cleaning the kitchen, serving the food. 

Inside Doppler, the building is clean and well decorated. Motivational quotes in slick typography scrawl the wood-paneled walls. A coffeeshop with old-timey neon lights illuminates the second floor, and there are these comfortable, lime green chairs that circle low-set tables. There’s even a miniatured version of Post Alley, a Seattle landmark, on the second floor where you can stick a Post-It on a wall with whatever message you want. The floor, though, is concrete, and industrial vents line the ceiling. It’s also quite cold inside whatever the temperature is outside, and I’ve regretted wearing shorts more than once.

The elevator ride up is so fast it makes my ears pop. But more than that, I feel my face growing stiff. Rocketing to the thirty-second floor, I think back to how hard previous days have been, and, as another toneless woman's voice tells me it’s time to get off, I feel something in me scream. 

I drop off my backpack at my desk, and I go to make myself some tea. 

Every morning, I pour myself some green tea. Free, but not an Amazon-wide perk. Just internal to our department. But I pour myself some tea, and the warmth feels good in my hands. Sleep had been difficult lately. The Airbnb I booked for the summer had no air-conditioning, which meant the room got quite hot during the day. Opening the windows at night, however, meant letting in mosquitos that left bites the size of large bruises on my arms and legs or, possibly worse, letting in spiders that’d build webs across my coffee table and couch, webs I’d step through in the morning. So some nights I suffered from the heat, and some nights I suffered from the bites, but, either way, the small bit of caffeine did a lot to keep me focused. 

As I come back to my desk, I see a few of my coworkers had come in, but I walk to my desk in silence, and no one bothers to wave or look up. It’s not in our team culture to say hello to each other in the mornings, or bye when we leave, or to eat lunch together, or to hang out outside of work. We have stand-ups every morning in which we announce what we worked on the previous day and what we’re planning to work on today, but other than that, and a few other work-related discussions and meetings, there is no conversation. 

Maybe that’s just what coworkers are.

I open my laptop to the state of a job I set running overnight, praying it hadn’t crashed. On the lucky days, relief, and I’m happy to see a green “SUCCESS” in the console, but luck doesn’t come most days. Most days, a red “ERROR” and “STEP FAILED” is what I see, and so begins a long process of debugging. 

There’s no one I can ask for help. My manager asks me what my project deliverables are. My mentor asks me whether parts of the project are possible, what would need to change. I’d been given a project our team hadn’t tried before. No one was familiar with the technologies we were using. So I slog through StackOverflow posts, internal wikis, random Google forums, hoping to find someone who can help, and sometimes I do, sometimes I don’t. It’s like wandering through the desert, crying for water, but seeing only sand and hearing only wind. 

By six, I’ve exhausted all of my emotional self-support, and I don’t know what to do sometimes. I call my mom. I get dinner with a friend. But I have a hard time looking anyone I know in the eye because I know if I do, I’d start crying. 

I usually eat at Chipotle for dinner because I’m trying to save money, and my Airbnb has no kitchen. Amazon doesn’t offer free lunches or free dinner, so I budget out fifteen dollars for lunch, fifteen for dinner, an amount calculated so I’d have some spending money over the school year. Chipotle, at less than ten dollars and more than a thousand calories, is a steal. I eat carefully so I don’t drop any food on my clothes because my Airbnb doesn’t have a laundry machine either, meaning any stains will sit until I can carry my hamper to the main house’s washer, and I can only do that on the weekend. 

The family renting the Airbnb is polite, but it’s hard to walk into someone’s home a stranger and feel comfortable, and it’s made clear I’m a customer. I can’t point to anything specific, but there’s no sense of consideration, no real sense of care, interest, or even warmth when I talk with them. I’m a customer, and, around the younger children, I'm a gross intruder. I can only sympathize with their caution. 

By the time I’m done with my Chipotle burrito, it’s usually seven, time to go the gym.

It’s been a while since I’ve fenced, but in preparation for the upcoming season, I promised myself I’d try and get back into shape. I liked listening to Kanye West, Kendrick Lamar this summer, but after the third ten-dollar USB-C to headphone jack dongle broke, I gave up listening to music while I worked. Still, after a long day of sitting at a desk and starting at a screen, it felt wonderful to move my body, to stretch, to feel some endorphins. It helped get the work out. 

After finishing my work-out, it’s always close to eight, eighty-thirty, so I can catch the slow 62 back to the Airbnb. In silence, starting and stopping, starting and stopping as the bus lets off its nightly riders, I have time to pause and think about how I hadn’t expected to like working at Amazon, but how I’d still come in hopeful, listening to City of Stars, staring at Seattle’s blue sky and green trees. 

*City of stars*

*Are you shining just for me?*

*City of stars*

*There's so much that I can't see*

My stop is 65th and 23rd, and I walk back to my Airbnb under the moonlight, the streetlights. I take out my cellphone and turn on the flashlight to check for glints of spiderweb, and, seeing the silver string, I look for a stick to cut them with. But I get snared anyway as I open the backyard gate to the main house and enter my shack. It’s nine usually, and after showering, I fall on the couch, address some messages, read through some TA-ship applications. The wifi is slow, measured in dozens of kilobytes per second, and Spotify stutters, emails just don’t load.

By the time I’m done, it’s ten, eleven, time for bed. There’s not much time to do anything else or maybe just not enough energy.

I turn off the lights and climb into bed, and, like the previous night, and the night before that, I can’t sleep because of the heat, because of the bugs, because the thought of doing this all again the next day makes me resent sleep more than anything. 

# Other Thoughts and Reflection

Hello! Thank you for coming back to read, and sorry this first post back is so gloomy. I figured though that while the iron is hot, I should stamp it, and that this is probably what most people were curious about anyway.

Overall, happy with what I wrote, and I think I got the mood right, even if I couldn’t include all of the memorable, horrible moments. I tried to write this in the way that this summer has felt. I wanted there to be a feeling of fragility because I was fragile. I wanted there to be some dissonance between how I was really feeling, and what I allowed myself to think about because there was. That’s why the piece was jumpy, disjointed, why it hopped back and forth between something emotional and something factual. It’s like the “This is fine.” comic. 

Originally, I wanted to make the bus the centerpiece because of this line I wrote that felt so true. Describing the feeling of being in traffic: "It’s the frustration you feel when you’re trapped, when you feel you’ve been cheated, somehow, into picking between bad and worse, when you were told there would be more, and there was nothing you hoped for, and no way out.” And though the piece didn’t pan out that way, I do think riding the bus is a lot like what working life felt like to me — just something you have to bear to get somewhere you don’t really enjoy. 

I think this post was also revealing for me in that I realized I avoid conflict like the plague, and that’s something that needs to change. I’m afraid of being mad and upset at people because I’ve been hurtful before, but I need to learn to voice my frustrations better.

A few other things: some things about this piece aren’t quite true. My coworkers are robotic, stiff, and it’s made me wonder whether it’s a problem with men, engineers, or both, but there were some I liked, and at the end, wish I had gotten to know better, really. I also left out what weekends were like entirely, but that’s because that’s a whole ’nuther post. A lot of interesting stuff there too, though, to be honest, not sure I’ll ever write that. 

Finally, on resuming the blog. I’ve thought a lot about this over the last few weeks. I don’t know, to be honest, whether a weekly update is feasible, but I like trying, so I’ll try, and maybe I’ll just take a break again when I need it. I thought maybe people would lose interest if updates become irregular, but I’ve realized three things. One, this is a solo, it’s not about other people, and whether people read this blog or not shouldn’t have an effect on what I wrote. Two, I’m happy to give out the link to my blog, but I’m not going to bend over backwards to get people to read it. And three, it seems like people didn’t lose interest, which is maybe the most flattering and surprising thing to me. So thank you all for that.

Two is also why I decided against implementing some kind of email update / notification system. I like that you have to work a bit to read my blog, that you have to actually navigate to the link. It shows you care, that you’re willing to put in the five seconds of effort to bookmarks this page or paste the link somewhere or whatever and check on it occasionally. I don’t think I want anyone reading this blog who wouldn’t put in at least that much effort. 

And last but not least, all opinions here are mine, not those of Amazon. Since I’ve cleared that, fuck Bezos. There’re a lot of things I dislike about Jeff Bezos that go beyond my personal experience, but that’s another post. 
