---
layout: post
title: Fencing
tags: [personal, fencing, long]
comments: True
---

When most people look at me, they usually don’t even guess that I exercise, let alone that I’m an athlete. And why would they? I’ve got gigantic calves (or so I’ve been told), but I wear jeans usually. I don’t have a huge torso. I’m not tall. I wear glasses, walk slowly, and speak quietly. I only talk about fencing when people ask me, which means most people I’ve worked with don’t even know. 

I don’t mind, to be honest. Being seen primarily or maybe entirely as a nerdy Asian kid works to my advantage. People just assume I’m smart and good at math and CS. 

But at one point, I was competing for world championships, flying twice a month to competitions, training fifteen, twenty hours a week and thinking about it even more. I’d practice in the dark of my room at night, hitting a target until the late mornings because I couldn’t sleep. I kept a journal that was supposed to help with my mental game, and I had filled the pages with “I’ll be the next world champion.” 

In short, fencing was the first thing I loved so much in my life, and it deserves a place on this blog in some form. 

This is a synopsis of my fencing career, and the lessons I’ve learned from it. 

### En Garde

At the age of ten, I was told by my mom that I was playing too many video games, and that I had to pick up a sport so I would stop lazing around the couch. I think she recommended tennis in what I imagine was one of those far-sighted, “oh yes he’ll be able to play with his colleagues” Asian-parenting moves, but I saw an episode of iCarly that week in which the characters “fenced,” a blade in each hand. That was pretty exciting, and my mom, less than thrilled, but at least supportive, signed me and my sister up for summer camp.

I wish I had recordings of that first day. 

We were nerdy Asian pipsqueaks whose athletic backgrounds could only be found in maybe their five foot mom’s middle school basketball career. In other words, we were not in shape and not athletic. 

The coach was this big, six foot plus Russian man, friendly but with a bit of a temper and with a voice that thundered when he was upset, who looked like he could pick up a car and maybe belonged to a gang. And he really, really liked conditioning. 

Holy smokes. After about a six hour day, I was limping into the car and crawling out of it, my sister was asking for painkillers, and we were a little concerned we would not survive. I don’t think I’d ever felt so much pain before then, and I certainly haven’t been that sore since.

On the second day, the last set of drills, the second to last superman, I was contorting my face in pain, and my sister looks over and says “Robin! You should stop!” 

I can’t remember whether I had been thinking to stop or not, but as soon as she said it I knew I’d rather die then let my arms drop. Maybe it was sibling rivalry. Maybe it was years of obedience to a mom who demanded so much out of me. Maybe I was just stubborn. But I knew, and I can still feel it now, that I would not let my arms drop, that do or die, no matter how much it hurt, I’d stay up. If pain tolerance can be learned, I learned it right then. 

The rest of the camp was uneventful. Luckily, physical conditioning improves rapidly at the start if you can bear the pain. I don’t remember much else, other than that I liked the sport, the coach was good to me, and that I was told I could do well. The real next step in my fencing career happened when I went to my first SYC, a national tournament for kids under 14.

### Ready

I think by that time, I'd been fencing for a few months, and I'd been doing pretty well in practice. With perfect greenhorn optimism, I confidently told my mom I would win that day — or at least get second. Instead, I puked in a toilet, lost to basically everyone, and cried for hours. A la Dunning-Krueger effect, I was awful, and I was too bad to even know it. 

I’d never been so embarrassed, so humiliated. I hated how bad I was, how helpless I felt. I hated how I cried after losing, how I felt like I had no control over my emotions. I hated how people around me could see everything, and I hated how they ignored me. I felt so insignificant and small, but that became the wellspring of my motivation for the next six years. I never, ever wanted to feel that way again. More than liking winning, I realized how much I hated losing, and so with venomous intensity, I swore I’d never lose anything again or I’d die trying, and I'd make those fuckers respect me.

A little dramatic, but who knew a kid could have so much pride?

I started coming to more practices, taking more lessons, sitting deeper on the squats, sprinting faster on the sprints, pushing hard on the push-ups, grinding, and grinding, and grinding, the classic Karate Kid training montage scene. It was the first time in my life I had worked hard at anything. School had never posed a problem, and I had never done anything other than school until that point. I was used to success, to praise, to having things come naturally. I was not used to pain, to being yelled at by dumb, angry Russian men, to having to work to get what other people got so easily. 

But it paid off. Your imagination will be more or less what happened, but two years later, at age twelve, I had finished 4th nationally, and I was winning tournaments — or at least getting second. 

### Fence

For those who don’t know, epee fencing is not a very consistent sport. Since you can hit anywhere on the body with no exceptions, and there is no designated attacker or defender, exchanges between you and your opponent can be a bit of a mess. It takes very little to make a mistake and get hit. That’s why the best epee fencers tend to be extremely patient, minimizing risk wherever possible, trying to bring every situation into their control. But at the lower levels and age groups, when people are still learning, it’s easy to get hit by random actions, which means it’s easy to lose to people who fence awkwardly or unconventionally, which means it’s easy to lose matches you weren’t supposed to lose, to get sniped by one of the dozens of random no-name fencers, and, thus to become an upset. 

Up until this point, I had been the underdog. I was the one making upsets. I was the one beating people I wasn’t supposed to. I was the one getting better, the new blood, the newcomer, the gossip. But you do this enough, and eventually you and other people realize you’re not the underdog anymore. You’re the crowd favorite. You’re the one that’s supposed to win. And that’s when my relationship with fencing started to become more complicated.

At the top of the mountain, everyone can see you, and people pay so much attention to you. They’re there the moment you win, congratulating you, clapping your back, telling you how great you are. But they also conspicuously vanish the moment you slip, stumble, and fall, and you start to worry, involuntarily honestly, about whether you’re good, about whether you were ever good, about how maybe you just got lucky or how maybe you were now a has-been. I don’t think I imagined the fickleness of my so-called friends either. The tournaments I got out early were the tournaments where people would pass by like they did before, not even a wave or a smile, only eye contact, the kind where you know you don’t even register in their mind.

Winning was still fun, but obviously not as fun as before. It was expected. And it didn’t feel quite like fun anymore. It felt more like a relief, a delay of failure. Losing was now more than heart-wrenching; it was terrifying, sickening, and because of that my mental composure took a turn for the worst, and I started hating competing. For a while, I couldn’t eat at tournaments, and I took melatonin to help fall asleep. On the best days, my body moved the way I wanted it to, and things just flowed. On the worst days, the pressure choked me and I sputtered out so painfully, so early. I remember more than one occasion in which I lost all depth perception, and I couldn’t tell how far away my opponent was. Or I’d walk on to the strip and forget how to fence, how to score, what I was good at and what to avoid. 

My coach recognized this problem, and he tried to help. His message was right — I needed to relax — but frankly, that was impossible. I had gotten to where I was by being mean to myself, by being harsh to myself, criticizing how I took X days off, or I didn’t try hard enough on Y drills, or any of a number of reasons. I was my own abuser, and I didn’t know how to be gentle, how to soften and relax, how to be generous and kind to myself. 

Or maybe I just couldn’t accept that sometimes you just get unlucky and it wasn’t a good day. Maybe I desperately wanted to believe that if I just worked hard enough, if I just pushed hard enough, I would get the results I wanted, that I could control the outcome. Because not being able to control when I fell or if I fell was too terrifying.

Either way, my response to becoming good was unintentionally simple — put my head down, train harder. I just didn’t know what else to do. But lo and behold, throw enough hours at something and you’ll keep getting better. I became a technical monster. Physically in great shape. Strategically as dumb as a rock, but at that level it didn’t matter. From thirteen and onwards, I was almost always the second best person from 1998. Scared or not, eating or not, sleeping or not, I was still delivering.

The next turning point came in my last year of cadets, the sixteen and under category, the year in which everyone wants to make world team and compete at world championships.

### Touch 

“I bet the team will be you, X, and Y this year.”

“Robin and X are shoe-ins for team. Who’s the third person?"
	
“I’d sign a contract, in blood, that Robin will make world team.”

By the time world team season rolled around, I had actually heard all of these. I was ranked second from the previous season. I had had a pretty consistent track record. All I really had to do was not fuck up. It seemed guaranteed.

Ha.

The year started well with a top 8 finish at a Cadet World Cup on no sleep, and I felt confident. “Everyone who made team last year got top 8 here,” the guy in first told me. But as time went on, results came in, and they were less than expected. I’d do well, but not well enough. X or Y or Z would do better than me, and I could see myself falling down the rankings. I’d tell myself, shoulders tense, face tight, “It’s okay next tournament,” and come back and train even harder. 

I took almost no breaks, no rests, despite traveling almost every other week to compete. I met with sports psychologists to try and establish a better mental game. I worked with boxing coaches to improve my conditioning. I was taking lessons almost every day to perfect technique. But I could still feel my dream slipping through my hands. I was flailing for solutions, so desperate to find anything that would help me win and catch hold before it was too late.
  
Come January, I’ve dropped from second to fourth. Top three qualify. It’s the last cadet world cup of the season, and my last chance to make the team. Without a strong showing here, I was almost certainly out. I barely sleep. It’s in Helsinki, Finland, a beautiful place with a beautiful frozen lake, a wonderland I could not enjoy. I’m walking around with my mom, and I don’t remember the conversation. But I remember the fear, the unease. She later told me I was so tense she couldn’t say a word. 

Surprisingly, I come out first out of pools, the preliminary round, winning all my bouts, though I remember I eked out several wins. They weren’t comfortable victories, and I felt uneasy because I almost never did well when I did well in pools. In direct eliminations, my first opponent is tougher than expected but fine. But my second opponent. A tall, skinny Latvian. We get on to the strip, and his fencing style is the worst possible match-up for mine. A heavy lean in forward. Constantly searching for blade. Little movement, but aware enough not to get hit by anything stupid. 

I can’t remember how the bout started, but I do remember how it ended. I remember losing the lead at some point, maybe the beginning, and desperate to score, to not let my dreams slip away from me, I attack. And he scores. Not knowing what else to try, I attack again. And he scores again. I attack, and he scores again. Slipping through my hands rapidly now, my dreams of world championships, and of being world champion, disappeared as his score rose above mine by more than seven. 

In some senses, I knew I would lose. I knew I had some deeper problems. Emotionally, I was still a wreck from middle school. Mentally, I had had just way too much pressure placed on me. Strategically, I was weak. I hadn’t had the same variety of fencers other people had had to inoculate me against some of the weirder styles. Somewhere, deep inside, I knew all this, and I was already broken. 

But it still hurt so much to lose that day, to know that I had fucked up so hard, that I had lost composure and that I was the one responsible. I could have trained differently, gone to other clubs more often, gone to more tournaments. But being bull-headed and afraid, I chose to keep on doing what I had done before, despite seeing the warning flags raised and hearing the sirens blare. 

I place third in Cadet’s and 7th in Junior's at Junior Olympics at the last tournament of the season, but too little too late. I was out.

### Bout

Recovering from whatever you want to call this was a long process. Long for many reasons. I had placed so much of my identity, my happiness in fencing. I had wanted something so much, so badly, and worked so hard for it, but I still didn’t get it. I had almost no close friends. So much was wrong.

I remember my mom’s face and feeling like I had wasted so much money, time, and energy — why couldn’t I have just been better? 

I remember my younger brother’s face and feeling like I had somehow let him down too by taking his mom away from him so many times, so often, and for what?

I remember crying. I remember I stopped believing hard work always led to great results, that so much random shit happens, why bother?

I had to take time away. I can’t remember now whether it was one month or two, but I didn’t touch a blade. My mom gave me leeway to do whatever I wanted, so I played a lot of video games. Anything to occupy my time and attention.  

I applied to colleges. I got into Stanford as a recruited athlete. I went to competitions that year, and I did terribly, to no surprise. But, in my heart of hearts, I also felt so much lighter. I felt freed from expectation. People had seen me fail when I should have succeeded. They had seen other people rise. The spotlight had shifted off of me. And I was so, so glad. Competing had made me miserable, I realized, and as much as I loved the sport, I couldn’t compete in the same way anymore. I didn’t want to.

The year after, I spent time getting to know the people I had only kind of hung out with, and discovered they were hilarious, fun, good people. I grew back my hair — I had had a buzzcut for years when I was competing — tried flirting with girls, tried learning how to dress well, played a lot of video games, and tried to be a bit more whole and less broken. 

And that’s still ongoing. It’s a process that has continued into college, and one that I’ll describe in a later post — this one is already too lengthy. 

But that’s the synopsis of my fencing career. Hope you’ve enjoyed it. 

### Thanks

I’d like to thank my coach, Velizar Iliev, for teaching me how to fence. I’ve been complemented more than once on having an elegant style, and that’s all your work. Thank you for bearing with me and my bullheadedness for so many years, and for all the support you’ve given me. You’ve opened more doors for me than you can imagine.

I’d also like to thank my mom. I felt selfish writing this post so centered around me because, really, my mom went with me to every one of these competitions. It’s obvious that without her, none of this would have been possible. But she counseled me through so many of my hardest moments, and bore my weight with me. She gave me unconditional support, and while I wish I had treated her better during those times, I’ll remember traveling with her forever. Thank you so much mom <3

Finally, I’d like to thank all the people I regularly fenced with. I don’t know if any of you will ever read this blog, but even after I was a total pretentious asshole, you still treated me well when I wanted to be friends. Special thanks to Brandon Benavides for sticking with me through so much and for being a great friend.

### Lessons Learned 

I know this has been long, but here are the top lessons I’ve learned from fencing that, I think, apply to life:

**There are two types of mistakes you can make: a mistake in planning and a mistake in execution.**

You can prepare the right actions and execute poorly. You can prepare the wrong action and lose from the start. But people often get frustrated and assume the reason they lost is somehow unknowable. It’s not. Review mistakes in planning, and practice until you don’t make mistakes in execution. 

**Being patient means only taking the good bets.**

I rushed a lot in high school because I was nervous, and while I knew older fencers often waited minutes before landing a single point, I didn’t know how to be that patient or what it meant. It just means, don’t do anything unless you’re really confident it’s going to turn out well. When there are high stakes, be patient, be disciplined. 

**Obsession is the fastest way to success and misery.**

I’m not totally sure about this one to be honest. I think my obsession with fencing is what led me to improve so quickly and also what made me so unhappy. But I wonder whether it really is the fastest way. I do know though it takes you to both ends incredibly fast.

**Know the distinction between colleagues and friends.**

I made this mistake in my fencing career when I didn’t understand all the strangers talking to me were colleagues, not friends. Colleagues come and go are interested in your work. Friends are interested in you.

**Experiment aggressively, don’t get hung up on the details.**

I was a technical monster, but I was by no means creative. I was largely mechanical, performing the actions I was taught well, but often too caught up in the details to experiment, too rigid in my mindset to be flexible. Understand why things are the way they are, and then play a bit more because: 

**Game day matters. Nothing else.**

You can be fencing terribly for weeks before a tournament. I didn’t even fence for weeks before some tournaments. It doesn’t matter. For better or worse, all that matters is a single day. Don’t worry about individual practices. Focus on nailing it just one time. 

### Reflection

Oh man. This was way longer than I thought. I hate long blog posts because I never read them. Usually they’re boring and they don’t get to the point. I tried to give you the condensed version, believe it or not, but it still ended up being way too long. I suppose it’s only natural though — this was eight years of my life.

And this doesn’t even include college! My opinions on fencing have changed since the end of high school, and I’ve thought a lot, both about the sport and how to compete. I may try and do one specifically about college fencing, but honestly, I’m not sure given how long this one turned out and, considering I’ll still be around, I don’t want backlash. 

I’m truly curious whether this will be interesting to people. I really do think it’s not something I talk about a lot. But, in some ways, it is a very typical athlete story. There’s really nothing more than I worked hard at something, fell short, and learned to make my peace. At the same time, it was life-changing, character-defining, world-shaping. 

There’s a lot of stories I wish I could have included in here. A lot of people who made the journey so so memorable. But I’m glad I wrote this. I can tell I’m forgetting the details, and I’m grateful I had a chance to celebrate a very important part of my life before it completely disappears like so much else into the past.

Only a few minutes late this time, next time will be 11 sharp!











