---
layout: post
title: Jazz
tags: [personal, short]
comments: True
---

I’ve been listening to a lot of jazz lately. Specifically, I’ve been listening to songs from La La Land and Whiplash on repeat, four to five times a day.

I’ve been unable to listen to anything else actually.

I can’t get into old favorites the same way I used to. I can’t listen to them for more than a few seconds without getting impatient, without flipping back to City of Stars, or Upswinging, or Whiplash, or Another Day of Sun. 

I can’t listen to anything else because nothing else holds my attention.

The bursts of the trumpets, the long, drawn-out wailing of the saxes, the punctuating drums, the tightness of the rhythm, the busyness of the beats, the story, the emotion, the softness, the sharpness, the clarity. The way sound explodes and fades and explodes again, stringing chaos into order. 

Jazz feels so alive, so dynamic, so vibrant, like there's a heartbeat at the center of every song.

And I think, lately, that’s what I want out of life — a richness, an intensity, color and motion, a pulse that says “I’m alive.” 

I’ve felt it before — when I broke up with X, when I didn’t make worlds, when I won that class award.

I feel it now — when there’s a sense of progression towards my goals, when I’m experiencing something truly new, when I’m wandering alone, when I’ve made new friends.

And I want more. 

I want to keep having jazz in my life. I want to keep feeling like I’m alive, truly alive.

# Stray Thoughts and Reflection

I wrote this because after writing The End of an Era, I was aware of what I wanted and how it made me feel, but I couldn’t articulate it to anyone. Though I don’t know about the quality — it feels embarrassingly short for how many hours I put in and too diary-like — this was still a pretty cool piece to write for me personally, because, while I knew I was listening to La La Land and Whiplash’s exclusively lately, I didn’t think really on why, other than that it made me feel good, that it made feel the way I wanted. But to then see the connection between jazz and what I’d been looking for was a clear ah-ha moment for me. 

I also want other things for myself. I also want to be able to live happily, to be able to enjoy a peaceful Sunday — to be able to take a break from the beat of the drum. But I focused more on this because this is the thing I want the most when I have energy, when I feel I’m at my best self, and it’s also something other people don’t seek out as much or maybe haven’t considered looking for. 

In terms of writing, the interesting challenge this time was describing music. I had no idea how to explain what jazz sounds like, and moreover, what jazz sounds like to me, how it makes me feel. What helped was actually listening to the music, and just writing whatever came to mind.

On being late (again), I know the biggest time sink in this process is in choosing a topic. It’s hard to find something that I want to write about and I think would be interesting for other people to read. So I put it off until Saturday, and that screws me over for Sunday. I think I have a plan for this, but we’ll see how next week goes. 

Either way, I appreciate you reading!
