---
layout: post
title: Solo
tags:
  - intro
---

Most of you are probably friends, and hopefully only a few of you are enemies, but to the point:

I don’t think I’m someone who’s typically open with their thoughts, for being a writer, or for being in any way a public person. And more than anything, I hate following trends, unoriginality, and 

So why would I do the most standard techie “but I’m not a techie" thing and open a blog? 

Because I think I needed to be less in love with my own writing, and I thought the best way to do that would probably be to actually look at it, or, even better, have other people look at it. 

More seriously though, writing is uninterrupted. In a conversation, I have to be fast. I can only say a few words before I lose a person’s attention. There isn’t time to make pretty analogies, to play with phrasing. There isn’t the space to edit thoughts, to deliberate on word choice, to try and put together something beautiful. People want simple quick, and that’s fair. I don’t wanna listen to some guy ramble for 10 minutes as he tries to figure out what he’s saying. If conversation were a dance, it’d be like watching your partner do a solo — but likely not even a good one — for 5 painstaking minutes, while you have to sit there, watch, smile, and clap, all the while dying to have your turn. Conversation is electric, dynamic, and it’s "give me the tldr or stfu" generally, which is fun in its own way. In a real conversation, you’re both dancing just faster than the other person can go, minds racing to the next point, but somehow still in sync. It’s the speed of the exchanges, the magic of saying something like “you know what I mean?” and having people actually _know what you mean_, the horrifying imprecision of language somehow working out that makes a really good conversation feel like idk, what I imagine drugs would feel like if I did them. 

But, at the same time, I want a medium in which _I can solo_. I want a medium in which I can write longer thoughts, express things fully in the way I want them to be expressed, and have people, for better or worse, be forced to read to the end of the sentence whether they like it or not. Selfishly, I don’t want to share the stage anymore — I want to be able to dazzle, to go at my own speed. And writing feels so perfect for that. I can put on whatever masks I want and be demanding, dominating, sassy, silly, resourceful, meek, absent. I can play with speed and tempo, writing phrases that stretch out with no end in sight where all you want really is the next comma so you can catch your mental breath, or could I write idk, a word. I’m not sure why it took me so long to realize this, but writing is not just expression, it’s self-expression, and there’s just so much to play with, so much room for creativity and joy, so much wild, fourth-wall breaking, “let’s do something interesting” potential, that yes, writing is something I desperately want to do. 

I will now lay out my aims and update schedule, as any good blogger probably should do. I would like for my writing to be described as dank, funny, light-hearted, but also insightful, thoughtful, and hopefully honest. I would like for it to be a stream of consciousness with a nozzle (that’s an analogy I’ve spent quite a while thinking about, and, I’ll admit, I’m a little proud of), but more than likely I can see this becoming a leaky faucet that needs a stupid amount of fixing. I’ll pull together a list of topics probably sometime in this next week that I’ll talk about, but really, this is only fun so long as it’s for me. I want something that feels like the kind of electric play that I think everyone secretly covets but almost nobody gets, and I’m not sure if this will ever be that if I make this a serious commitment. 

Finally, I’d like to thank the people who’ve inspired me to write — Andrew Huang, for his humorous and so-in-line-with-his-character blog (link here), Sam Kwong, for his bravery in posting so many days of self-reflection, Katie Mansfield, who writes things I felt genuinely impressed and touched by, though she probably doesn’t know it, and finally my sister Rachel Cheong, who has encouraged me to not be a robot for the past almost 21 years, and who instilled so much of my love for reading and GOOD FUCKING WRITING. 

And special thanks to Tony Duan, Robel Daniel, Alex Wang, Vince Rangantahan, Emma Abdulluh for looking over this — despite the gusto and panache with which I’ve tried to write this piece, writing is still frankly terrifying, and the other side of self-expression — self-exposure — is even more so. 

That’s all for now. I can say I’ve throughly enjoyed writing this in favor of doing “real work” and I’m grateful to those who have read through the whole thing. 

tldr; I’m posting my thoughts, read if you want LOL
